+++
title = "Release of Tokay v0.6"
+++

After seven months of intense development, we're happy to announce version 0.6 of *Tokay* as another milestone towards a stable and final version of the language.

<!-- more -->

# Self-contained parser

One of the main goals of this release was to make `tokay.tok` become Tokay's main grammar. This eliminates the maintenance of two parsers (`parser.rs` and `tokay.tok`), and clears the way for extensive future changes on the grammar and AST.

`parser.rs`, which is Tokay's internal parser, is now generated from a version of `tokay.tok` parsing `tokay.tok` executed by Tokay. It's quite like a lizard eating its own tail, but yeah, it is!

This made the entire macro-based compiler, with a grammar expressed as Rust macro callls, obsolete.

# Object improvements

Plenty of improvements went into the object system.

## `dict` allows to use any immutable Tokay value as keys

Most values in Tokay have been declared as immutable - the only mutable values are `dict` and `list`, as in this case the content of the value object is modified, rather than replaced (as it is the case with atomic values).

This finally made it possible to use any Tokay value - except `list` and `dict` - as keys for `dict` as well, and not only `str`.

```tokay
d = dict()
d[true] = 1
d[42] = true
d[23.5] = "yes"
```

## Enforcement of `void` paradigm

The `void`-value defines nothing and can be used so. To remove an item from `d` above, just set it to void:

```tokay
d[true] = void
```

In case a defined "nothing" should be set, use `null`.

# Syntax

The syntax was enhanced as well. Tokay v0.6 also contains a syntax draft for the upcoming generic parselets feature. The language accepts syntax, which might raise a `todo!()`-call and stop.

## Inline sequences

Within brackets `(...)`, Tokay now accepts for inline-sequences in an improved version. `()` defines the empty list.

Other sequences either result in a list or in a dict, depending on their content. This behavior should be changed im Tokay v0.7, so that lists can be defined explicitly, and everything else is a dict.

## Item retrieval and assignment

The retrieval of items in objects has been standardized. This is done using the methods `*_get_item` and `*_set_item*`.

```tokay
l = (1, 2, 3)
l[0]  # 1
l[1] = 4

d = (a => 1, b => 2)
d["a"]  # 1
d["c"] = 3  # inserts 3 as "c"
```

The current implementations are

- *dict*:
  - dict_get_item
  - dict_set_item
- *list*:
  - list_get_item
  - list_set_item
- *str*:
  - str_get_item

*str* objects cannot be modified,

## `Char`-builtin replaces `[...]`-syntax and `.`

The previous `[...]`-syntax for character-classes was removed as it is reserved for the upcoming list syntax, and was replaced by the `Char<>`-builtin.

```tokay
Char         # previously `.`
Char<a-z>    # previously `[a-z]`
Char<^a-z>+  # previosuly `[^a-z]+`
```

The new syntax already follows the planned syntax design principle for generic parselets, but is integrated into the language and yields in Char-tokens.

## Area syntax `@(...)`

This new syntax allows to define a parseable sequences with in-place reader extend.

Given the program
```tokay
x = (Int ',' Int | Ident)
print(repr(x))
```
the `print` will never be executed, because the sequence in the assignment matches input, and Tokay's default behavor in a block is to accept a matching sequence as an alternative.

To avoid this behavior (which, indeed, might be a wanted behavior!) and without introducting a new parselet to resolve this, the area syntax can be used:
```tokay
x = @(Int ',' Int | Ident)
print(repr(x))
```
The region inside the `@(...)` gets parsed separately, and the reader is extended so that the program continues as expected.

# Changelog

This is the full changelog of this version.

- General
  - Use of [num-parse](https://crates.io/crates/num-parse) for `Int` and internal string-to-int conversion ("parseInt()"-like behavior) (#65)
  - Updated `clap` command-line parser to v3 (#61)
  - Improving internal `testcase` function and moving all prior `#[test]`-functions into separate Tokay testcases (#86)
- Syntax
  - Operator `//` for integer division implemented (#92)
  - Operator `%` for modulo operation implemented
  - Area syntax `@(...)` for in-place reader extend (#78)
  - Character-class syntax changed from `[a-z]` into `Char<a-z>`, `.` and `Any` substituted by `Char` (#98)
  )
  - Improved syntax for inline blocks and sequences (`|`-operator)
  - Improved list syntax
    - `()` the empty list
    - `(1,)` list with one item (explicit comma required)
  - Implemented `x[...]` item access syntax for rvalue and lvalue (#80)
  - Preliminaries for generic parselets (#10)
  - New built-in signatures (#84)
- Compiler
  - Parser
    - `parser.rs` is now generated from `tokay.tok`; syntax-changes are only done in `tokay.tok` now! (#93)
    - Removed `macros.rs` and macro-based bootstrap parser entirely
  - Internal revision
    - Removed structs `Usage` and `ImlResult`
    - Integrating all `impl Compileable`s into `ImlOp`
    - Code construction now happens in `ImlOp` as well
    - Added required changes to
      - determine whether a part of code consumes input
      - preliminaries to generic parselets (yet unfinished)
  - `prelude.tok` provides some default-parselets defined in Tokay itself
    - `Number` matches either `Float` or `Int`
    - `Token` matches arbitrary tokens
- Virtual Machine
  - Internal refactoring of the essential `Context::collect()`-function (#67)
  - `Frame` is now managed by `Context`
- Values
  - Turned Value::Int to crate [num-bigint](https://crates.io/crates/num-bigint), replaced Value::Addr by the same type (#55)
  - Definition of mutable objects; Imutable objects push a clone of, mutable objects push a ref on the object
  - `dict` now allow for any non-mutable value as key (#96)
- Builtins
  - Added `dict.clone()`, `dict_push()`, `dict.pop()`, `dict.get_item()`, `dict.set_item()`, `list.get_item()`, `list.set_item()`, `str.get_item()`
  - Renamed `dict_update()` into `dict_merge()`
- Examples
  - The self-hosted Tokay parser in `examples/tokay.tok` was now moved into `src/compiler/tokay.tok` and is used to generate `src/compiler/parser.rs` (#93)
  - The JSON parser example in `examples/json.tok` was improved to latest developments
